Title: Canyon Road
Date: 2014-6-25
Tags: transportation
Slug: canyon-road
Author: Daniel Zappala

There have been a number of discussions at City Council meetings
regarding SR 146, known locally as Canyon Road in Cedar Hills and 100
E in Pleasant Grove.  The state highway is not in good condition and
needs to be reconstructed and widened. We are asking UDOT and Utah
County to work together to ensure SR 146 is reconstructed and
maintained to protect the safety of our families on this important
highway. We do not believe it is fair for the city of Cedar
Hills to be responsible for the significant costs that come with
owning and maintaining a state highway.

[Please sign this petition](https://www.change.org/petitions/udot-and-utah-county-commissioners-reconstruct-widen-and-maintain-sr-146).

<!-- PELICAN_END_SUMMARY -->

## SR 146

State Route 146 is a highway that serves northeast Utah County.
It provides a major connection for residents of Alpine,
Highland, and Cedar Hills to Pleasant Grove, Orem, and central Utah
County.

![Canyon Road](/images/canyon-road/canyon-road.png)

Cities from Pleasant Grove southward toward Provo use SR 146 to access
American Fork Canyon.  This major recreational area includes
Timpanogos Cave National Monument, a trailhead for Mount Timpanogos,
fishing at Tibble Fork Reservoir and Silver Lake Flat Reservoir, and
numerous campgrounds. It is the gateway to numerous trails for ATV
riders, hikers, mountain bikers, and motorcycle riders, as well as
snowmobile riding and snowshoeing in the winter. Use of the canyon for
recreation is heavy, and the Forest Service expects this popularity to
continue to increase.

![canyon](/images/canyon-road/canyon.jpg)
<br><span class="caption">Vehicles traveling toward American Fork Canyon</span>

## What Needs Fixing?

SR 146 has been constructed in patchwork fashion over a long number of
years. In addition, the state has not invested significant resources
in maintaining the road recently. As a result, the pavement and road
base is deteriorating in numerous spots, with signs of subgrade
failure.

![cracks](/images/canyon-road/cracks.jpg)
![cracks](/images/canyon-road/cracks-2.jpg)
![cracks](/images/canyon-road/cracks-3.jpg)
<br><span class="caption">Canyon Road cracks and surface failure</span>

Public works departments typically try to maintain a residual
service life (RSL) of more than 10 years for a roadway. If a road is
built, and no maintenance done, then it is expected to last about 20
years. To increase the RSL of a road, a city, county, or state can
provide periodic surface treatments to ensure it does not fall below
an RSL of 10 years. Our city engineer estimates that portions of SR
146 have an RSL of 5 years or less.

Other major problems with the highway include:

* **Poor Drainage**. Ponding on the road can lead to hydroplaning during wet
  periods and ice formation in the winter. At least one Cedar Hills
  resident reports flooding in his home during heavy storms. The road
  needs storm water drainage and curb and gutter construction.

![water](/images/canyon-road/water.jpg)
<br><span class="caption">Water ponding due to poor drainage -- winter brings more water and ice</span>

* **No Turning Lanes**. Currently, there are several intersections on the
  northern portion of the road without turning lanes, which backs up
  traffic during peak hours. Some drivers navigate onto the shoulder
  of the road to pass cars waiting to turn, causing hazards for
  pedestrians and bicyclists.

![water](/images/canyon-road/no-left-turn.jpg)
<br><span class="caption">No left turn lane at some intersections</span>

* **No Center Turning Lane**. The road lacks a center turning lane in numerous
  places, making difficult for cars turning onto the highway to make
  it safely across both lanes.

![turning](/images/canyon-road/turning.jpg)
<br><span class="caption">No center turn lane</span>

* **Poor Road Profile**. Near Bayhill Road in Cedar Hills, the center line
  crown is not consistent. This means the road has dips and bumps,
  causing some cars to bounce as they drive southward. We have seen
  several accidents where cars flew off the road and into neighboring
  fences.

* **Bad Sight Distance**. At some intersections, the site distance is
  poor. Fixing this requires lowering the highway through this
  section.

![sight](/images/canyon-road/sight-lines.jpg)
<br><span class="caption">Poor sight lines at Harvey Blvd/9600 N/4000 N</span>

* **No Shoulder**. The road lacks a shoulder in numerous spots, making
  conditions dangerous for pedestrians and disabled vehicles. There
  are numerous bus stops along Canyon Road in Cedar Hills, and our children
  need a safe place to walk to and from school.

![shoulder](/images/canyon-road/shoulder-2.jpg)
<br><span class="caption">Narrow shoulder along Canyon Road</span>

Additional safety improvements are needed long term:

* **Pedestrian Crossings**. There are few safe pedestrian crossings
  across the road, particularly in the northern part of Pleasant Grove
  and in Cedar Hills.

* **Bicycle Lane**. There is no bicycle lane for the road. This is the
  major thoroughfare leading south from Cedar Hills, and an access
  point for the Murdock Canal Trail, yet cyclists do not feel safe
  using the road.

* **High Speeds**. Although the speed limit is 40 mph, cars regularly
  travel at speeds of 50 and 55 mph. The highway could use traffic
  calming devices such as center median strips and roundabouts to
  encourage lower speeds.

## What is Being Done?

Based on meetings Mayor Gygi has attended, the city council has been
told that UDOT considers the road a low priority and does not plan to
do anything more than a basic mill and pave for the highway. This
would fix the most significant problem of the road base and subgrade
failures. Depending on how the resurfacing is done, this may also fix
some of the issues with the road profile.  However, this would not
address the numerous safety issues listed above.

A related issue is that the state funded the reconstruction of North
County Boulevard, which widened the road to four lanes with a center
turn lane, widening the road and installing traffic signals and
several intersections. There may be an agreement that in return Utah
County agreed to a jurisdictional transfer, where the state would take
ownership of North County Boulevard and the county would take
ownership of SR 146. If the county takes ownership of the highway,
they have also expressed that they will only be willing to do a mill
and pave for the road, likewise not addressing the safety issues
listed above.

To provide a better solution for our residents, Mayor Gygi has been
working with the [Mountainland Association of Governments
(MAG)](https://mountainland.org/site/) to secure approximately $9.5
million in funding for the reconstruction and widening of the highway.
[This project](/images/canyon-road/SR_146 Reconstruction and Widening
Concept Report_Final.pdf) would cover widening the road to accommodate
3 lanes with a 8 foot asphalt/gravel shoulders, from State Street to
2600 North in Pleasant Grove. From 2600 North to American Fork canyon
the road would be widened to provide 2 lanes with 8 foot asphalt/gravel
shoulders.  Additional improvements include safety upgrades at 2600
North and 4000 North (9600 North/Harvey Blvd.) to improve sight
distances and alignment.  Turn lanes will be added at 2600 North and
the road will be lowered at 4000 North. Finally, there will be
improvements along the corridor from Cedar Hills Drive to Paige Lane
to provide storm water drainage into a basin near the Murdock Canal,
and numerous areas would receive curb and gutter improvements. This
money is only available if the county takes ownership of the road.

## Ownership

As discussed above, a major question is who will take ownership of SR
146.  There may be an agreement for UDOT to transfer the road to Utah
County. The county has asked Cedar Hills and Pleasant Grove to take
ownership of the road if the cities want anything done beyond a mill
and pave.

City staff has estimated that if Cedar Hills were to own the road that
we would need to spend about $80,000 per year for maintenance. One
possibility that has been mentioned is for MAG to provide enough
funding to cover maintenance for the first 10 years, but the city
would still be required to spend this much starting in year 11.  Snow
plowing alone will require the city to buy a 10-wheel truck and a wide
snow blade, plus build additional covered storage for this equipment.
In addition, any long-term major reconstruction costs would be footed
by the city.

Currently, Cedar Hills receives about $250,000 in Class C road funds,
which are collected from a portion of the state gas tax.

![Class C Road Funds](/images/canyon-road/class-c-road-funds.png)

We spend about that much on street supplies and maintenance, not
counting snow plowing, street lights, signs, street sweeping, etc.

![Street Costs](/images/canyon-road/street-costs.png)

Spending an additional $80,000 per year on streets would be an
increase of about 22% for our road fund, requiring a tax increase or
service cuts elsewhere in our budget.

## UDOT and Utah County should commit to reconstructing SR 146 properly

It is clear that UDOT has not maintained SR 146 properly, and Mayor
Gygi's conversations with UDOT indicate they do not intend to make any
significant improvements with the highway. UDOT has recently
reconstructed SR 92 as the main access to American Fork Canyon, and
invested significant resources in reconstructing and widening North
County Boulevard. We appreciate these improvements, but SR 146
continues to be neglected. State highways ought to be properly
constructed and maintained by the state.

If Utah County has an agreement to take ownership of SR 146, in return
for the state's work on North County Boulevard, then they should take
ownership of the road, reconstruct it, and maintain it properly.

Neither the state nor the county ought to neglect this 
highway.  SR-146 is currently the primary access from Pleasant Grove,
Linden, and Orem to American Fork Canyon. Visitors from Salt Lake
County northward use SR 92. Visitors from south of Utah County will
use I-15 and then may take SR-146 or North County Blvd. to reach the
canyon.  As mentioned above, American Fork Canyon is home to numerous
outstanding recreation activities and a National Monument, and SR 146
serves as an important highway for this destination.

![orem timp cave](/images/canyon-road/orem-timp-cave.png)
<br><span class="caption">Access to American Fork Canyon from Orem</span>

Some discussions with Utah County have indicated that the county
believes Pleasant Grove and Cedar Hills should take ownership of the
road if any significant safety improvements are made. However, the
highway serves a much broader population than just Cedar Hills and
Pleasant Grove, so the these cities should not be burdened with its
cost.  Utah County has a [$75 million dollar road
budget](http://www.co.utah.ut.us/dept/clerkaud/Budget.asp), compared
to [$363,000](http://www.cedarhills.org/finance-documents/budget) for
Cedar Hills and
[$553,000](http://www.plgrove.org/pleasant-grove-information-25006/city-budget)
for Pleasant Grove. The county can also ask the state for help, as
they did with North County Blvd.; UDOT has a [$1
billion](http://le.utah.gov/lfa/reports/cobi2012/agcy_810.htm) budget.

## Petition

[Please sign this petition](https://www.change.org/petitions/udot-and-utah-county-commissioners-reconstruct-widen-and-maintain-sr-146).

Our petition asks UDOT and Utah County to work together to ensure SR
146 is reconstructed and widened, so that major safety issues are
addressed. If the county takes ownership, it should accept the money
provided by MAG and reconstruct the road as detailed in the
proposal. Whoever owns the road should commit to providing proper
maintenance for the road in future years and any additional safety
improvements that are needed. The cities of Cedar Hills and Pleasant
Grove should not be responsible for owning or maintaining a state or
regional highway.
