Title: Commercial Development
Date: 2013-10-29
Tags: development
Slug: commercial-development
Author: Daniel Zappala

I would like to collect resident feedback on the proposed commercial
development across the street from the Charleston. It is important
that the council hears from residents regarding their concerns, to
ensure the development minimizes negative impacts. I want to work with
the developer to ensure your concerns are met, while also providing a
vibrant commercial area that has great places to shop and eat and
enhances our property values.

Please add your comments below!

<!-- PELICAN_END_SUMMARY -->

![town center](/images/towne_center_front.png)

## Background

The city has been approached by Blu Line Designs and Project Utah to
build an apartment complex for 55+ adults. The developer would like to
purchase the property owned by the Smart family, across the street
from the Charleston and the Walmart. On this property, they would
build an apartment complex, shown above, with some first floor retail
and a few adjacent retail buildings. Long term, the developer would
also like to purchase the property owned by the city, to the south of
the Hart's gas station, and add a movie theater, restaurants, and
retail.

The planning commission has met with the developers several times, and
a presentation has also been made to the City Council. The city held a
public hearing for the preliminary plan on October 24th. Numerous
residents attended and provided feedback regarding the development.

## Feedback

This is a list of comments and concerns I have heard so far. I will
keep this list updated as people comment below.

* The apartment building is too tall. It is currently designed at five
stories for the wings on the sides and five stories for the middle
wings. Initial plans were for all wings to be five stories tall, and
the developer has reduced the size of two wings. Residents feel this
is still too tall and is out of scope with the neighborhood.

* The total number of apartment units is too large. The building is
designed for approximately 300 units. Residents feel this density will
place stress on the surrounding areas, including parking and traffic.

* Larger families, or individuals below the age of 55 will move in,
requiring more parking, increasing class sizes in local schools, etc.

* The theater location is too close to the neighborhood behind
it. Residents don't want a tall building in their backyard, blocking
their views.

* There will be too much traffic on 9900 N, the street directly to the
south of the theater. As cars exit the parking lot, many will choose
to drive through the residential area when traffic is backed up trying
to turn left onto 4800 W.

## Suggestions

Suggestions I have heard include limiting the building to three
stories, ensuring there is adequate parking, and relocating the
theater so there are lower retail areas adjacent to the neighbor's
backyards. The council should explore requiring an agreement that
units can be rented only to 55+ residents, with a maximum of 2 or 3
people per apartment. Once the south part of the development comes up
for consideration, the council should work with the surrounding
neighborhoods to ensure traffic concerns are met.

## Design

Below are images of the current design, as presented at the public
hearing.

This is a high-level view of the development plan. You can see the
apartment complex in the back left. In the center is a retail
development anchored by a theater. The road coming up from 4800 W
toward the theater is split by a large, landscaped median, with street
parking in front of restaurants and shops. Directly in front of the
theater is a public plaza, including a fountain or splash pad
(possibly an ice rink in winter), with shops on either
side. Surrounding this are other restaurant and retail spaces.

![town center overview](/images/towne_center_overview.png)

This shows the proposed buildings of the plan. You can see the
apartment complex, rotated diagonally, so that residents are not
looking directly down on the neighbor's backyards. The spaces between
the wings are intended to be lanscaped gathering areas. The main
street through the development cuts north-south from Walmart over to
the movie theater. This is intended to have a "downtown" feeling, in
the sense that the street has wide sidewalks, landscaping, and traffic
calming devices, so that cars are not speeding through the area and
people can safely walk or bike from shop to shop.

![town center plan](/images/towne_center_plan.png)

I have encouraged the developer to extend the feel of
this street all the way to the movie theater. The parcel to the north
and west is owned by a different developer, and Blu Line is working
with them to try to be sure their plans dovetail with this concept.

The developers have provided the following rendering to show the scale
of the apartments as compared to the neighborhood homes. Rotating the
building does provide increased space between the homes and the
complex.

![town center scale](/images/towne_center_scale.png)

The developers plan to put an exercise trail around the apartment
complex, and this shows one proposed element of the trail.

![town center trail](/images/towne_center_trail.png)

The following are computerized rendering of the apartments as seen
from Harts. These are taken from when the complex had all wings with
five stories.

First, the view from Harts:

![town center view harts](/images/towne_center_view_harts.png)

From north of the nearby roundabout:

![town center view roundabout](/images/towne_center_view_roundabout.png)

And from the golf course:

![town center view course](/images/towne_center_view_course.png)

Note that you can also see some of the earlier designed presented at
previous planning commission meetings, held August 22 and September 26.
