Title: Developer Tour
Date: 2013-11-12
Tags: development
Slug: developer-tour
Author: Daniel Zappala

Today the developer, Doug Young, took city staff and a couple members
of the planning commission and city council on a tour of some of the
sites he has developed. We got a chance to see some of his
developments in Draper, Herriman and Sandy.

<!-- PELICAN_END_SUMMARY -->

## Rosegate

The main location we visited was the [RoseGate 55+
apartments](http://www.forrent.com/apartment-community-profile/1000068350.php)
in Sandy, built by the same developer. You can see a promotional video
at the above link.

Mr. Young provided some shots of the exterior:

![Rosegate exterior](/images/towne-center/rosegate-exterior-1.jpg)

![Rosegate exterior](/images/towne-center/rosegate-exterior-2.jpg)

Note that because of the size of the lot, and design guidelines
enforced by Sandy, this building sits right on the street and does not
have much nearby retail. The development planned for Cedar hills will
have more space and landscaping around the building, and will be more
conveniently located to shopping for residents, with Walmart across
the street. Mr. White has an incentive to provide the additional
retail he has planned. Since he will own and lease out the units in
the building, he will want additional shopping and dining options for
residents, which will increase rental prices.

Here is a closeup I took of the exterior:

![Rosegate exterior](/images/towne-center/rosegate-exterior.jpg)

Here is a shot of the lobby, which is located right inside the main
entrance:

![Rosegate lobby](/images/towne-center/rosegate-lobby.jpg)

Behind the lobby is a beautiful clubhouse, which can be used for
parties and other events:

![Rosegate commons](/images/towne-center/rosegate-commons.jpg)

The facility has a four floors in total, with another amenity on each
floor. A craft room:

![Rosegate craft](/images/towne-center/rosegate-craft.jpg)

![Rosegate craft area](/images/towne-center/rosegate-craft-area.jpg)

A library:

![Rosegate library](/images/towne-center/rosegate-library.jpg)

There is also a theater room and an exercise room.

Each floor is decorated in its own colors:

There is also a theater room and an exercise room.

![Rosegate hall](/images/towne-center/rosegate-hall.jpg)

The apartments themselves are pretty plain, but functional, and range
from 700 to 1300 square feet.

![Rosegate apartment](/images/towne-center/rosegate-apartment.jpg)

## Theaters

We also visited several theaters. In South Jordan, The District is a
thriving area, with shops and restaurants, plus Target and other big
stores, near a theater. This is much larger than the development being
planned for Cedar Hills, but has a "main street" leading up to the
theater that the developer would like to imitate:

![District shops](/images/towne-center/district-shops.jpg)

At night, the theater looks pretty impressive:

![District theater](/images/towne-center/district-theater.jpg)

We also visited a theater on a smaller site in Sandy. The development
for Cedar Hills would be larger than this one, but I was able to get a
good shot of what a 20-foot landscaped setback would look like behind
the theater:

![Theater back](/images/towne-center/theater-back.jpg)

Mr. Young also showed us around Daybreak, and explained how the
planned retail for Daybreak has struggled because it lacks an anchor
attraction. The District has pulled away the retail and
restaurants. Likewise, down the street from The District is a Walmart
that has some fast food restaurants but lacks the traffic of The
District. He believes that because a theater draws people into an
area, this will make the difference between Cedar Hills having
sit-down restaurants and upscale retail versus fast food and strip
malls. He wants a retail area that will better suit our demographic
and the residents of the senior living facility.

## Thoughts

Mr. White appears to be a very successful developer, and has carried
off big projects in Salt Lake County. I like the idea of a
master-planned development for our commercial area. This would provide
much nicer shops and restaurants to our community, as compared to a
strip mall. The big advantage for us would be that this would help
increase our property values. It would also provide residents with a
nice area to shop and find entertainment close to home.

The senior living facility at Rosegate is nicely designed. The
interior is lovely and welcoming. I was pleased to hear the property
manager tell us that they are not allowed to rent to anyone with
children, due to restrictions on 55+ housing. In addition, their
experience is that only 10% of the people living there are under the
age of 55, and generally move in when they are caring for someone
older. This eases my concerns about younger families and kids
overwhelming our crowded schools.

The Rosegate facility is large and imposing because it sits right on
the street, and there is little landscaping around it. The planned
facility with Cedar Hills would be set back farther from the street,
and have shops and green spaces surrounding it. Mr. White plans to
make it feel more like a hotel in its design elements and amenities,
and wants to provide closer shopping and dining than is available in
Sandy. I think that if Mr. White is willing to lower the height of his
building to three stories, that this could be a good fit for Cedar
Hills. A smaller building will lessen the impact of parking and
traffic, and will also blend better with the Charlston and the
surrounding residential community.
