Title: Pressurized Irrigation Capacity
Date: 2014-09-06
Tags: water
Slug: pressurized-irrigation-capacity
Author: Daniel Zappala

On Thursday, 14 August 2014, the city held a town hall meeting
discussing our pressurized irrigation system. This meeting discussed
the capacity of our water system, how it will react under various
scenarios.  The bottom line is that continued operation of our system
at the levels we saw in 2013 will likely cause premature failure of
key system components and unreliable system performance. If we are
able to implement conservation measures that reduce our water usage to
reasonable levels, then our irrigation system should have adequate
capacity and performance.
 
<!-- PELICAN_END_SUMMARY -->

## How the Water System Works

Our pressurized irrigation system consists of water sources,
storage ponds and tanks, pumps, and pipes. An overview is shown in the schematic
below:

![system](/images/pressurized-irrigation/pressurized-irrigation-system.png)

### Sources

To obtain water for use by residents, a city purchases water rights in
various sources, either to take water out of a river or lake, or to
drill a well and take the water from an underground aquifer. Typically
a water right is a certain number of shares in a system. The amount of
water represented by a share changes each year and depends on the
amount of snow melt and rainfall received. For example, if a city owns
500 shares in the water coming from American Fork, out of a total of
10,000 shares, then it owns 500/10000, or 5% of the water from the
river that year.

Cedar Hills owns water rights for the following sources:

* American Fork River (the Pleasant Grove Ditch)

* Canyon Well: a former farmer's well, is not culinary grade, and
  pumps about 600 to 700 gallons per minute

* Cottonwood Well: a new well drilled in 2009 to provide a redundant
  source of water for the city. This well pumps at 1700 gallons per
  minute and can send water into either the culinary system or the
  pressurized irrigation system, depending on where it is needed.

* Central Utah Project: this is water that is delivered from the
  Uintah Basin throughout northern Utah. The city has several
  connections into a pipeline of this system, at the northern and
  southern ends of the city. This pipeline is operated by Central Utah
  Water Conservatory District.

Note there is also a Harvey Well used for culinary water. While this
is not a component of the pressurized irrigation system, it can still
affect the system. If the Harvey pump was to experience mechanical
difficulties, then the city would need to switch the Cottonwood Well
to the culinary system in order to provide drinking water. This would
make the Cottonwood Well unavailable for pressurized
irrigation.

Currently, demand is high enough that the city needs the Cottonwood
Well for irrigation during hot summer months. This means that if the
Harvey well experienced difficulties during July or August, then there
could be a significant lack of irrigation water during these
times. This is particularly unfortunate because the Cottonwood Well
was designed to provide redundancy and not be heavily used for
irrigation during the summer. Due to high usage, the city has
essentially used up its redundant facilities.

### Storage Facilities

From these sources, the city stores water in a number of locations:

* Pond #10 on the golf course between holes 9 and 10

* Pond #12 adjacent to the fairway for hole #12

* Pond #17 on the golf course near hole 17

* Pond #18 on the golf course near hole 18

* Storage tank on a hill above the golf course

In several places, the city uses booster pumps to raise water into
storage located at higher elevations. This provides the pressure
required to run irrigation systems. There are five booster pumps that
deliver water from Pond #10 to Pond #12. There are six additional
booster pumps that deliver water from Pond #12 to the storage tank
above the golf course.

### Pipes

Pipes are used to deliver the pressurized irrigation water throughout
the city. The city is divided into three zones, the upper, middle and
lower zone. The upper zone serves roughly

Using three different zones ensures that pressure is adequate to run
irrigation systems without being so high that it breaks the pipes and
sprinklers in residents' yards.

## Study

The city commissioned a study by Hansen, Allen & Luce Engineers to
design a water model of our city and then to simulate the city's
irrigation system under various scenarios. Richard Noble, an engineer
with the firm, [presented their results](http://www.cedarhills.org/sites/default/files/town-hall-capacity-assessment-2014-08-14.pdf).

### Water Usage

The main reason for the study is that the city's usage during 2013 was extremely high as compared to [water guidelines](https://extension.usu.edu/files/publications/publication/ENGR_BIE_WM-36.pdf) established by the USU extension.

![usage](/images/pressurized-irrigation/usage.png)

The study authors believe that long-term operation at 2013 levels will
cause premature failure of key system components and unreliable system
performance.

### Pressure Problems

Mr. Noble shared some analysis of pressure fluctuations in different
areas of the city, comparing 2013 demands (5.9 million gallons per
day) versus a scenario in which the city is able to conserve water
(3.5 million gallons per day).

These graphs show the fluctuation over a period of three days, with
low pressures occuring overnight when most people water their lawns
and high pressure during the middle of the day.

According to the model, Timpanogos Cove has the most significant
problems, with pressures dropping to near zero overnight. However,
with conservation, pressures are projected to stay more stable.

![timp](/images/pressurized-irrigation/timp.png)
<br><span class="caption">Timpanogos Cove</span>

Other areas see similar fluctuations based on 2013 usage, but do much
better with conservation:

![dorchester](/images/pressurized-irrigation/wedgewood.png)
<br><span class="caption">Wedgewood Drive</span>

![dorchester](/images/pressurized-irrigation/dogwood.png)
<br><span class="caption">Dogwood Lane</span>

![dorchester](/images/pressurized-irrigation/dorchester.png)
<br><span class="caption">Dorchester Drive</span>

### Scenario 1

Mr. Noble then presented several scenarios that were modeled. Scenario
1 examines the capacity of our system under current (2013) demands.
In this case, the results show that there is inadequate pressure in
the neighborhoods surrounding Timpanogos Cove Park, as illustrated
above.

In addition, the are marginal pressures in some areas o fthe middle and
lower zones. The system experiences high velocities in excess of seven
feet per second in several key pipes, which can wear them out prematurely.
In addition, there are high pressure fluctuations in several areas. 

Note that this study was done for our current number of homes. In the
future, we can expect 10% more homes, with an accompanying 10% higher
demand, making these problems a bit worse.

### Scenario 2

Scenario 2 examines the system with water conservation methods in
place, which reduce city-wide demand to 3.5 million gallons per day,
This could be due to residents voluntarily following state guidelines
or installing waterwise landscaping, or the city installing meters on
the system and residents reducing water consumption due to market
forces.

In this secnario, system pressures are significantly improved, and
overall, pressures are much more stable. (See figures above.)

In addition, pipe velocities are improved, leaving only a few trouble
spots. These can be addressed by upsizing as needed when leaks occur.

Even in this sencario, there is one concern for the city. The booster
pump at the south CUP turnout is improperly located, causing low
pressures for residents living north of the pump.  The city may need
to examine reconfiguring this pump at some point in the future.

### Scenario 3

Scenario 3 examines the system with water conservations methods in
place, for a future when the city is completely built out. Results
from this scenario indicate that *the pressurized irrigation system
appears to have adequate capacity for buildout conditions if water
conservation measures are implemented.*

### Scenario 4

Scenario 4 examines the system when a well failure occurs. This
includes either the Cottonwood Well or the Harvey Well experiencing a
mechanical breakdown. These failure situations are equivalent because
in both cases the Cottonwood Well would be unavailable for
irrigation. If the Harvey well breaks, then the Cottonwood Well would
need to be switched over to culinary water.

In this case, the city could increase deliveries from the North CUP
Turnout to deliver water to the system. However, this is a short-term
situation only, because the quantity of CUP water the city can use is
limited by contract. Even in this case, the city would need to take
immediate action to reduce demand on the system so that we could avoid
high velocities in the booster pump.

### Scenario 5 and 6

These scenarios examine the system if a booster pump fails at Pond #10
or Pond #12. There is enough redundancy in the pumps that we can get
by, but normally these pumps cycle on and off so they are not
overworked. If one of them fails, then the others would need to stay
on for longer periods, which increases the likelihood that another
failure occurs. In this case, the city would need to take immediate
action to reduce demand on the system, unless we had already reduced
demand due to consevation measures.

## Conservation

It was pretty clear from this presentation that Cedar Hills needs to
start conserving water. Without conservation, our system is being
stretched beyond its design capacity. Continued operation at the
levels we saw in 2013 will likely cause premature failure of key
system components and unreliable system performance. I'll share ideas
for conservation that were developed by our water conservation
committee in a future post.

